now 3 million gallons of spilled toxic
waste from an abandoned mine has turned
a southwest Colorado River into a giant
orange stream of pollution but it's not
the fault of corporate mining no the
Environmental Protection Agency is to
blame the EPA says contract workers
accidentally caused the spill as the old
gold King mine was being inspected but
the toxic problem has filled beyond
Colorado sludging its way through waters
across state lines artis Lindsay France
has more for us from Los Angeles Lindsay
we're talking about this the West does
not need another reason to worry about
their water situation out there now we
see these dramatic images of an orange
river how did this situation unfold well
it's important to remember that a lot of
these abandoned mines out west and there
are a ton they've got to be monitored by
the EPA because obviously there's water
inside these minds and they're gathering
toxins such as lead arsenic and a whole
slew of other heavy metals that can
obviously be be harmful to humans and to
enter rivers so what happened was these
these EPA contractors who were trying to
go in and gather material and gather
evidence on the water in there and
properly deal with it now a spokesperson
for the EPA sort of outlined how this
calamity began let's take a listen to
what she's got to say the spill occurred
when one of our contracting teams was
using heavy equipment to enter the kick
the gold King mine and it's an inactive
mind just north of the city of Durango
and to begin the process of pumping in
treating the contaminated water inside
no more detailed information at this
point has been released but obviously
they're scrambling to contain further
damage as this spreads across multiple
states but they have assured us that the
initial spill or leak has been contained
now Lindsay there are communities not
only in durango we're so much of their
community is revolving around this
animas river but in New Mexico I'm
hearing not only is there a state of
emergency but there are towns that are
rationing water that have
certain limited amount of days that they
can get by without having to pull water
from this river until we figure out
what's wrong what are some of the other
implications that you've seen as this
waste continues to spread well what the
EPA is trying to do now is to measure
upstream and downstream how far this
flow has gotten at this point they are
even creating fish catchments to measure
the particles in the fish to see if it's
gotten into the fish what they're
worried about at this point is the
agriculture the drinking water and the
recreational water that are accessed
from these from these areas of the river
and in all the little tributaries that
are feeding off of it so they've called
as you mentioned states of emergency and
they're really keeping people out of the
water away from the water so they can do
some really in depth measurements a big
worry here for people is that as these
particles settle into the settlement
it's much harder to get it out and
that's a real danger because as you said
people are already rationing how do you
go back into the river in one month two
months time when you've got to irrigate
or drink water in your house when that
stuff is in the soil and in the wildlife
it's a big problem and as you said
there's rationing going on people can't
get to the rivers a very well called
state of emergency and the EPA's gotta
scramble to get ahold of this because
they are finding it's much worse than
they thought I can't imagine that we
have an estimate as to when we can have
this all cleared up the damage is
clearly all there but has the EPA said
anything so far about their specific
plans yeah the one of the things they're
really trying to make people aware of is
the runoff situation so this didn't just
get into the affluent into the into the
river and the tributaries runoff from
this whether it's hit soil around it etc
when there is rain it is going to impact
this possibly increase concentrations
they're trying to get in front of the
problem however how do you do this when
there's so many compounds in the water
so as I said they're trying to catch
fish so it's Fisher a great measurement
of pollution and water and they're
trying to measure the sediment
everything and so they've got a ton of
scientists and their it's an interagency
effort there really were they're really
working through various agencies to get
in front of this but again it's measure
water its measuring soil it's measuring
how far this is traveled and how deep
it's gotten into the sediment so so far
the bullet points they're very broad but
there's a lot of money being pumped into
this obviously because it's going
through multiple states and people are
suffering so it's going to be a story
will be covering for the next several
months as they scramble to get ahold of
this situation certainly very costly
spill RT correspondent Lindsay France
from our Los Angeles studio